hello welcome to the latest live stream
from Explorer here at the University of
Oxford where we're going to be
discussing big questions and the
question this week as hopefully most of
you are aware is could we live on
another planet which is a fantastic
question we have a fantastic panel of
academics from the University who will
be helping us discuss this who I will
introduce shortly but before I get to
that I'm just gonna let you all know
basically how you can win some prizes
because it's probably why we're all
really here isn't it so there will be a
prize draw and the way it works is there
will be some details scrolling along the
bottom of the screen which will tell you
how to get in touch with us so you can
use Instagram you can use Twitter you
can email us you can also use the chat
window on the live stream page and
basically we want you guys watching to
send us your questions so what do you
want to know based around the big
question of could we live on another
planet and you can keep sending these in
all throughout our livestream debate you
can also send them in right up until 11
a.m. tomorrow when we will announce the
winner and send the lucky person some
bug matches so without further ado let's
get cracking with the questions so as I
said could we live on another planet
maybe you think that's an easy question
maybe you don't who knows but there's a
lot to think about is the key thing to
bear in mind
[Music]
so hopefully that gave you a few things
to think about sort of a few thoughts
buzzing around in your head so as I
mentioned we have a for mention puddle
here and they are now of course going to
introduce themselves so they are all
academics here at the University of
Oxford and we will go in order I think
and we'll start off with John hi my name
is John Wade I'm a planetary scientist I
work in the earth science department of
the University of Oxford and my research
interest is really built around how
planets form how the Earth Moon Mars
came to be and the implications for that
on how the planets that evolved so
questions I'm really interested in is
what is the composition of the Earth's
core and also why is there still water
on the surface of the earth today there
isn't water on Mars but there isn't on
earth so how did this came to be hi my
name is Tessa Baker I'm an
astrophysicist in the physics department
at Oxford and I think a lot about the
role of gravity in our universe so
gravity is really the dominant force
that shapes the universe everything from
the Big Bang to galaxies to the lives of
objects like stars and and planets and
the force of gravity that we experience
on the surface of a planet would be a
key factor we'd have to think about when
assessing its viability for life my name
is Kasim Ali I'm the classics outreach
officer classics is the study of ancient
Greece and Rome they're the languages of
the people that lived there their
civilizations their culture their
blossomy their history their literature
and I think studying the ancient world
is a really good way to kind of think
about what do we think of as normal in
our society today I might be a really
good jumping-off point to think about
how we might imagine what future
societies might look like so a good
variety you will hopefully agree so we
have a planetary scientist we have a
astrophysicist and we have a classicist
I am particularly looking for I'm really
looking forward to Cassie's thoughts on
this okay and also you guys watching
like how you know this link
between civilizations and space and
planets I think it's really really cool
oh so I'm very much looking forward to
see what what we discussed and what
comes up so now you know what they study
what they do what they can
there are experts in they are actual
experts you know again send us your
questions think about you know questions
related to these particular topics what
do you want to know and help us guide
the debate so we can tell you guys what
you're you know the answers you want to
hear basically right so to start off
with we've actually asked all of the
panel to each bring in an object
relevant to their academic area and
relevant of course to the big question
code we live on another planet so John I
I know your object is pretty heavy so I
think we should start with yours so you
don't have to hold it for too long so
please tell us about your object so I've
brought in an iron meteorite and I
dropped this on my toe this morning so I
kind of know how the dinosaurs may have
felt this weighs about 20 kilos and it's
a piece of almost pure iron and it's a
it's the core of a small planet they
didn't quite make it this thing has been
floating around space for the last 4.6
billion years pretty much in this form
so these are some of the oldest things
you can actually hold in your hands and
this is analogous to the Earth's core
so 3,000 kilometers beneath our feet is
this big ball of molten iron and it
would made a very very similar material
to this so this is and this is very
important the this this metallic core in
planets is essentially what keeps us
alive it provides a magnetic field which
helps life on Earth evolved and not be
damaged by radiation so these sort of
this material is it's very key to
develop planetary development and we'll
put it down acts in ways and Tessa what
is your please tells about your object
and its relevance to our big question so
I brought in some sleeping pills so even
if we are able to overcome the
challenges of getting off this planet
and getting to another one there's no
guarantee that the planet we end up on
will have all the comforts of home that
we're used to and one thing that might
be very different is the experience of
day and
and seasons on that new planet so other
planets outside our own solar system
spin a very different rates depending on
how they were formed so if a planet
spins if it takes more or less than 24
hours to spin on its axis we've got to
cope with the day and a night that's a
different length similarly if a planet
is closer or further away from its
parent star than our earth is from the
Sun we'd have a year that has a
different length so a nice example of
this is the planet Venus
which actually takes 243 Earth days to
rotate once on its axis but it only
takes 225 days to go around the Sun so
on Venus a year is actually shorter than
a day so every day really is your
birthday and Kasim what do you have for
us and I brought in a replica
non-original
of an ancient coin this is a decade
rack'em from ancient Syracuse which is
in Sicily and over the boot of Italy and
it's from about 400 BC which is 2400
years ago and I've also got a kind of a
50p from modern England as a comparison
I want to think a little bit about kind
of these objects as as ways to think
about how society functions now how it
used to function how it might function
in the future we'll see both these coins
look quite similar on one side they've
got kind of the head of someone on the
British coin it's kind of Queen
Elizabeth on this old decade Rackham
it's a nymph from the local River in
Syracuse and on the other side we've got
on the British coin we've got this kind
of seated female figure which most
people think is kind of a representation
of Britannia as a goddess and on the
DECA Drakken we've got kind of four
horses and a chariot and some of the
things we might think about are kind of
what would money look like on another
planet in a new civilization would we
kind of continue with these systems of
trade and value that we've kind of had
for such a long time already or would we
come up with something new and then kind
of if we
think about how rooted these coins and
these images are to place kind of
Britannia this is a coin for England and
kind of very invested in this idea of
England as a place and again the same
with the nymph on our decade Rackham
it's related to the to the river to the
place around what might we take with us
okay guys at least it wasn't the
meteorite for example kind of the horses
on the on these chariots kind of we
might think about leisure activities on
another planet kind of are we going to
take things to do relating to kind of
having fun are we going to take animals
with us to other planets kind of humans
have lived on this earth for thousands
of years in a kind of complex ecosystem
with other animals and other creatures
if we go and found a new civilization is
it just gonna be us a lot to think about
for sure so I've seen you like that what
about the animals actually I'm gonna
throw this out there for everyone
watching okay if you could take one
animal with you from Earth to to our
future civilization which animal would
you take with you I think what I would
maybe take a tiger so I could have it as
like a little pet and maybe this is
already smelling bad things for the
civilization anyway right no fantastic
lots of very interesting things so we've
got I in cause and magnetic fields of
course could play a role in our future
planet we've got the whole thing about
day and night and we've got lots of
things to think about it as our
civilization so to some other questions
then now so I've got one here for you
John
what do you think yes get ready what do
you think would be the biggest challenge
that we'd face if we were to move to a
different planet I think it would
actually be getting there the distance
is involved in getting from say the the
earth to Mars or the earth to Venus are
huge so Venus is all about this closest
26 million miles away so one of the
problems is this takes a long time this
transport from the earth to this other
planet would take a very long time and
you have to remember that the Sun is a
big nuclear reactor throwing out lots of
radiation so one of the problems is
you've got to spend a long time in space
and you've got to be shielded from this
radiation radiation isn't good for you
no and we get sunburns
it's pretty painful but obviously
there's even more problems when you're
spending a lot of time in space with
high-energy radiation so getting there
in a reasonable time protecting yourself
and transporting all that material that
you actually need to build a new colony
in space on a new planet is very very
difficult so this is the big reason why
we haven't we've been to the moon and
nowhere else
it's the the distances in space are huge
and the physical problems are immense
just with you mentioning they're about
getting things to and from them I'm just
imagining like what if you were out of
t-box on this like Cyd now you guy just
pops at the shot you can't get Amazon to
deliver them again okay exactly no
absolutely internet connections gonna be
pretty cool fabulous right Tessa one for
you should we move to another planet
should so there are lots of reasons we
might want to move some of those are
self-inflicted unfortunately things like
global warming nuclear weapons
overpopulation and competition for
resources so those things might drive us
away sooner but at the very latest we do
have a hard deadline for leaving our
planet now the good news is no need to
panic it's not for another five billion
years but in about five billion years
the Sun will start to die so sort of
garden-variety average stars like our
Sun live for about ten billion years
ours is about halfway through its life
and what happens after ten billion years
is the Sun will start to run out of
hydrogen which is which it burns as its
main fuel so it will have to burn other
elements within it instead and when that
happens their chemical composition
changes inside of the Sun will cause it
to swell up and become what we call a
red giant star and this red giant will
be so big that most likely it will
envelop the earth and at that stage we
are literally toast other things we
might have to think about even before
then our asteroid impacts like the
asteroid that wiped out
the dinosaurs we could expect something
like that to hit us well before those
five billion years are up so so in short
yes we probably should we should
tomorrow don't panic but one day let's
start thinking yeah okay yeah always
always good to be prepared okay
I like it right Kasim so you made a
lovely introduction earlier about you
know this idea of creating a new
civilization and talked about various
questions and do keep sending in those
animals by the way I'm actually looking
forward you guys come up with probably
better than my tiger
so if we were to create this new
civilization could what lessons could we
learn from the past I think it's very
interesting so we've whenever we study
the ancient world lots of times we kind
of use models of ancient civilizations
as kind of examples which we maybe
should learn from but I think it's
interesting to kind of think about how
much and how little we should take from
ancient civilizations so often places
like Athens in kind of the fifth century
BC are held up as kind of civilizations
was produced great arts and literature
and culture and kind of the foundations
of modern democracy and things like that
but it's really worth questioning kind
of what works them and what didn't and
one of the things we might say is places
like happens where a slave owning
patriarchal society well might also
think of somewhere like Sparta which was
very invested in kind of creating the
perfect society but they were highly
they were highly eugenic about it they
kind of controlled who had children they
controlled which children were allowed
to grow up and where they grew up and
very much kind of how people develop
like that so kind of there's lots of
interesting things to think about when
we're thinking about what we want our
new civilization to look like from
lessons from the past it's not something
which is a new thing to do kind of
imagining new civilizations the ancient
Greeks we have loaded examples of the
ancient Greeks imagining what a new
civilization might look like you've got
cloud cuckoo land which is intervention
of comic playwright Aristophanes the
idea of kind of what would happen if we
had a new civilization kind of in
between earth and heaven and how kind of
the people that live there I would kind
of intercept the prayers as they went up
be a wealthy society because of that you
have a kind of a very famous example of
Plato's Republic which is kind of this
Greek philosophy who had the idea to
kind of see
what my a perfect society looked like in
terms of justice and laws and morality
kind of who should be in charge how do
we deal with kind of interrelationships
he concluded that kind of philosophers
should be in charge so I'm not so he was
completely unbiased in the way he
thought about it but kind of how places
relate to each other and how it works is
a really interesting part kind of think
of how we might imagine the new
civilization absolutely clearly with pet
Tigers yeah it's obviously fantastic
right so we now have a little fun
feature for everyone watching and also
in fact for our panel we are going to
put forward a multiple-choice question
based around our big question could we
live on another planet so the the
closest planet to earth is Venus and so
the multiple choice question that we
would like you to answer and to select
what you think is correct is if you are
going on a holiday to the planet Venus
how long would the flight take so the
answers hopefully are on the screen but
it's a is it 11 days be 64 days or C 153
days so please do have a bit of a thing
about this have a bit of a discussion
and we ourselves are also well I'm going
to ask the panel for their thoughts so
John what what came to your mind when I
well when I mentioned you're going on
holiday to Venus how long does the
flight take what came to my mind was
what have I done wrong I mean you know
Venus isn't exactly a holiday
destination I want to go to the pressure
on the surface of Venus is 92 times the
atmospheric pressure on Earth so it's
very heavy 92 bars the temperature is
500 degrees C on the surface of Venus
it's pretty warm as well and on top of
that the weather it doesn't rain water
it right and sulfuric acid so Tom more
of a dumb wrong are you sending me to
Venus hey to me this sounds like an
adventure like you know get me one of
these radiation suits about I'll be nice
and comfy and laughs I go yeah maybe who
knows right Tessa I'm not sure I want to
go to Venus either I'm a bit worried
about this flight to be honest 11 days
just about coke with but if it's
sixty-four days or 153 days that is a
long time to spend cooped up in that
tiny tin can with your family or whoever
else is going you get really bored you'd
also have to think about the effects it
would have on your body so we know that
muscle wasting is a real problem for
astronauts who spend a long time in
space because you don't have gravity to
work against so you start to lose some
of your muscle so I think we need to
develop a fitness regime we're gonna do
on this on this rocket to Venus I'm
afraid a little it'll pass sometime
maybe not how you'd like to spend your
time the internet connection be all
forwardly no Netflix and all workouts I
know it's not looking good I'm Cassie
anything to add well I just I thought
I'd be remiss not to mention that kind
of Venus is the name of the Roman
goddess and the goddess of love and sex
and kind of the Romans people's were
kind of they were also looking to the
stars and kind of wondering what and
eventually I decided it was a who these
kind of bodies moving through the sky
were and I wondered maybe if we get to
Venus we'll finally it's not actually a
planet but the the home of the goddess
Venus and what might happen there it's
certainly something to ponder right well
thank you very much um so of course meet
with hopefully you've all now had a
chance to think about this yourselves
with some helpful and perhaps not so
helpful input from our panel and so we
will now reveal the answer actually I
know that John actually knows this one
being a the planetary scientist that he
is so I'm going to pass over to John to
explain the answer and and why it's and
its closest Venus about twenty-six
million miles away from the earth and
its furthest around about hundred and
sixty two million still talk my head off
to remember so the various there were
various missions that have flown to
Venus not many actually there were the
venire emissions in the 1970s Mariner 2
so for the era was a Soviet Union
mission and they actually landed on the
surface of Venus we do actually have
some pictures of the surface of Venus
and this is also how we know about the
temperatures and the pressures of the
atmosphere so Mariner 2 took about just
short of four months of an era a similar
sort of time so in terms of this
multiple choice and I think this the the
number hundred fifty three days comes
from isn't that the European ma the ESA
is Venus Express launched on November
the 9th 2005 so that got there very
quickly so 153 days is the answer
it is the thir it's a long time yeah and
I really like that that that point you
made about the distances it's something
I didn't think I'm straight away the
fact that you know if you're trying to
fly to Venus where it's at its closest
point to it yes worth yeah crazy its
farthest away pipe that that's just
what's it like seven times further
Russell that's right so this is why
missions to different planets have very
sort of fixed windows in which they can
take off from because otherwise the
planet moves further away from the earth
and you've got to use more energy
catching up or or getting to that planet
so yes this because we're all orbiting
the Sun and we all orbit at different
rates hmm I guess this would of course
really have an effect you know if we
found another planet elsewhere that we
could and habit you would actually have
as you said a window where when you
could get to and from with supplies and
other PD exactly yeah or getting out
getting back as well so you couldn't
just hop on your plane and go hop on
your spacecraft and come back any time
you from any time you lights you'd have
to have to fix at certain points the
year oh it's summertime I've got to go
see my mom fabulous right well thank you
very much for explaining well done to
anyone who got that would correct
so let's now move on to some questions
sent in from olive leaf audience so we
have a fantastic question from James
senior girls big shout out why is there
water still on earth and not on other
planets all I can answer this one this
much specialist topic contain actually
this is a really interesting question I
think there's lots of reasons different
planets have different gravity so some
water you boil off now it's also maybe
to do with the amount of water that each
planet was given or a creature that is
very start when it first formed
different planets might have had
different amounts of water but questions
we don't really know the answer to very
well
we're really did the water on earth come
from was it so that is it all come out
of the ground when the when the earth is
cooled or was it added by cometary
material after the earth had formed and
actually on Mars we definitely know Mars
had water but it lost water about three
three-and-a-half billion years ago and
there's lots of reasons why that might
be so Mars is a little bit smaller it
cooled very quickly but it also could
have reacted with its rocks the rocks on
Mars a much more iron rich and when we
look at Mars we see a very red planet
very sort of rusty planet so one of the
things we think may have happened is
that water actually on the surface of
Mars
lots of oceans just reacted with the
rocks and in Mars dried up whereas on
earth we still got water and again how
this happens and this is very important
for things like plate tectonics and life
and everything else but why this is so
again is not a really clear answer so
our scientists don't know everything and
I think that's a fair thing to say it's
a good question yeah fantastic question
thank you now I've got one you say you
heard Tessa
so before you gave this fabulous
description of the the expanding Sun and
the fact that it would make the earth
toast as you as you put it so we have we
have Aylesford school
hello tales for school who have asked if
the Sun eats the earth will the earth
melt melt well given that it's a large
iron core potentially some you know some
layers of it would would melt certainly
everything on earth would be a tear on
the surface of the earth would be
completely scorched right we would
certainly use all our oceans in boil
them off I don't think it's quite fair
to say you know you just have like a
molten goblin baby hanging there in in
your red giant but it would basically
get dissociated and absorb it into the
material of this it's red giant
which is so much bigger than Earth we
would basically get lost in this red
giant mm-hmm it doesn't sound pleasant
either way does it no okay Bob and now I
think this is one I'm gonna put to you
can see now this is a tricky one this
has come from Felsted so thank you and
this is who should be in charge of the
new planet
you might not know John not me and my
Tiger yeah what do you think I think you
should be me I bet I think it's a really
really important and interesting
question especially when we think about
kind of how kind of colonies as a kind
of a model of how that might worked in
the past and how a my work in the future
kind of who is in charge of the small
groups of people that go off and
represent them somewhere else kind of
who we can ascend are we gonna send kind
of representatives from every country on
earth or we can have kind of is it going
to be a NASA project and kind of run by
America is it going to be a Russian
space program project and run by that is
it going to be a huge collaborative
thing using the many people as possible
when we get there then who's on who's in
charge and kind of what happens when
those people interact and was really
interesting there's a ancient Greek
historian good Thucydides who tells us
the story about two very small
insignificant colonies of Corinth and
Athens you've got into a little squabble
and caused a war between these two big
cities that lasted kind of more than 50
years so kind of who's on who's in
charge on the on on this hypothetical
new civilization and kind of how those
people interact with each other is gonna
be a massive part of kind of earth
politics as well and how we relate to
those colonies wherever they might be
that links really nicely into this next
question so I got over this to the
entire panel
so from Dame Allen school again
thank you very much these questions they
are brilliant we have the question we've
ruined this planet so should we not live
with the consequences who would like to
jump in on that one any thoughts or
anybody if it's a philosopher's question
first isn't it yeah well I mean I think
it brings to mind immediately to me the
idea that for lots of previous
civilizations and humanity are kind of
inextricably linked so for the ancient
Athenians they had this idea of
autochthony which is the idea that they
were born from in Athens so that humans
and Athens rose out of the ground they
are part of the soil and it's one of the
reasons why they kind of didn't let
anyone else into Athens to be a citizen
of Athens your father had to have been a
citizen of Athens and kind of you could
only inherit sit in the ship and I think
that's only an idea which we kind of
still have a really interesting
relationship to the idea that we're kind
of humans and earth are kind of part of
the same thing if we go back to our
more than 50 PK and we've got Britannia
this kind of representation of britain
on a coin this idea that kind of our
civilization our society is still very
much tied to the place which we're in
there's a really important one I don't
know if that means that we should live
with the consequences and destroy in the
earth I think that kind of humanity is
infinitely adaptable and kind of the
long history of humanity shows us that
kind of what being human means has
changed multiple times and kind of how
we live together has changed so I see no
reason for us to not kind of keep
changing that definition or maybe being
human might become detached from being
on earth at some point maybe we should
not be quite so negative and think you
know life on Earth has our life on Earth
might be might be pretty we might made
that problematic but actually we don't
really see with there's no evidence for
we've not found life on other planets
yet and the reality is you know we are
quite a special planet we've got liquid
water with 4.6 billion years old had all
this evolution going on we got
atmosphere and plants and whatever so
one way to look at that might actually
be if we do live with the consequences
maybe we should should treat the planet
with a little bit more care and
consideration and think about it that
way rather than thinking that you know
we can't go anywhere else because we've
made a mess of this actually getting to
another planet is difficult to say so we
should I was gonna say we might not have
a choice here exactly I mean given the
number of exoplanets so that's planets
outside our own solar system that we now
know about we have something like 4,000
known exoplanets
now discovered not all of which are
suitable for life you know something
they're too big too hot or whatever but
if we do find one that has all the
conditions we want our Yi a prime bit of
real estate we might find it already
taken we might not be able to to go
there because you know there may be
other civilizations and given the number
of planets we're discovering even just
in our local patch of the galaxy and
given that there are tens of billions of
galaxies out there I think there has to
be life out there on other planets so I
think we've got competition
I'm with you largely I I could approach
this from a mathematical perspective and
so we have this famous equation called
Drake's equation some of you may have
heard of this and basically it's it's an
equation with various terms in it and if
you plug in the numbers of sort of the
probability of life it basically comes
out and says that somewhere in the
universe there will be life but you know
it's quite a small probability but it's
nonzero which means that you know if you
search for long enough and far enough
because the universe is so big there
should be life in there so this is quite
contentious but I I'm very much with you
I think that there just has to be yeah
something I might say the other angle oh
I see I'm a bit more bit more
pessimistic about life there's lots of
things that have to happen when you
build the planet even things like the
moon forming event which we know
happened very late on as a big
consequence for the development the
planet thereafter so these all very
random events that have to happen in the
right order so I'm not quite so hopeful
that there's the the same number of
planets that are habitable for us and
they're also very long way away so even
if they were habitable we've got to get
there yeah that's the big problem I
think and I think anyone is within reach
at the moment but the size at the
universe is such that I I can't see it
not happening more than once hmm okay
right Kasim back to you you've got no
people as I said this whole idea of
civilizations I think it's fantastic to
bring to this to this question it's not
something you'd immediately think about
so we have a great question from Chris
thank you Chris which is if we moved to
another planet would there be a
universal economy and should there be a
universe like being Universal economy so
I'm not gonna be sure what a universal
economy might be some of the ideas might
be kind of would it be one that's
universal to both our current earth
economy and this new place is that other
resources kind of I'm not an economist
but kind of the way we put value on
things is kind of based on a finite
system of resources if we then add
another whole planets
resources and ways of doing things to
that system how will that economy kind
of play out with each other how will
value change how work will inflation
travel across them now this is easy one
new planet how all things they cost it I
mean I think ideally I'd love for our
new planet if we've got the chance to
start again
it'd be really great to kind of scrap
money as a thing I'm not sure it's it's
great for humans it'd be really great if
we had kind of a system of kind of
especially cuz we gonna have to monitor
how very closely kind of the resources
we tape to this new planet things like
oxygen for example which we might be
taking for granted but it might be
something we have to kind of terraform
on our new planet so kind of access to
oxygen and water and food and and
everything shouldn't I don't think
should be kind of part of an economic
transaction especially if we kind of
think of starting a new planet as kind
of a global product to save humanity
from our inevitable burning up in this
red giant we kind of want to make it
work as best we can so kind of some kind
of system which kind of tries to give
everyone everything equally is just in a
way that what kind of Plato would have
wanted us to think about a new society
as I kind of share things out equally
kind of I feel like I'm going down a
communism route here and maybe that's
the antithesis of kind of a universal
economy would be kind of scrapping
economy altogether potato based economy
a potato that brings me very nicely
I tried eggs faster their job now that
you brought up potatoes so I'm having a
bit of a discussion earlier we had John
I basically said if he could take one
item to another planet what would it be
and of course it'd be great as well if
you if you guys watching how to think
about this you can only take one item
with you to your new planet plus all the
various allocated resources but one
specific thing to you what would you
take and I know John wants to take
potatoes potatoes so you're gonna have
to explain this one potatoes I mean you
know chips crisps mashed potatoes sugar
potatoes I'm not a chocolate fan but I
think the potato I've Moody mr. potato
I've really missed chips and crisps so
now I'm taking potatoes you can leave
your tiger at home I'm taking my spuds I
can grow potatoes I just grow more off
of me
I could have a potato based economy
though I thought one
quite interesting thing to take would be
musical instruments particular things
like stringed instruments if you take
those to a planet that has a different
pressure and an atmosphere composed of
you know different ratios of gases you
could get very different sounds out of
your your standard guitar so I think I'm
going to set up a little Orchestra a
little string quartet on our new planet
and it's gonna you know break onto the
scene with some new style of music my
highbrow answer should be kind of a
laptop we're kind of unlimited storage
Survive dots and lots of new things I
think my real answers probably I want to
take the PlayStation because I hey I'm
just one final thing in fact quite a few
people asking what kind of conditions or
resources would we actually need to find
on this you know this mythical planet
that we are going to move to so I guess
this is probably more for John and Tessa
what kind of things would we need on
this planet first of all you need a
planet with a solid surface so of the
planets in our solar system some like
Mars and Earth have solid rocky surfaces
or oceans in our case but others of them
like Jupiter and Saturn are gas giants
right there literally huge balls of gas
and they are dense in that in the center
but the surface is is you know miles and
miles of gas so to start with we need
something we can actually stand on I
think we were agreeing earlier that
pressure is an important thing if the
pressure is too high because of you know
the different atmosphere we're going to
get crushed to death we'll need
exoskeletons to walk around outside on
the other hand if the pressure is too
low you can't actually keep liquid water
on the surface which which in itself is
a huge problem so those are two things
it's bring to my mind so water is one of
them I mean so we need liquid water we
rely on liquid water for all sorts of
things so that fixes the temperature
range between or 100 degrees so really
we want to be in a sort of temperate
range you know sort of sub 50 degrees
centigrade I mean the other thing is
oxygen we obviously need oxygen and
we've evolved to take into account
there's about 20% oxygen in the
atmosphere so we've evolved say that
into account an oxygen is in the
atmosphere because of life so ideally
all these little things unless we took
our oxygen or we made oxygen on the
surface we'd really like we really want
to look for a planet that looks almost
like Earth and that would be the ideal
thing is it looks like Earth maybe that
a few poisonous spiders and we are
searching for those planets right now
actually it's it's worth mentioning
there are there are missions actually
there's a mission called tests which was
launched just last month it's launched
in April two thousand eighteen which is
a planet finding mission so we look for
we have various methods of looking for
planets orbiting around other stars and
as I mentioned earlier not all of them
are earth-like but some of them the ones
we were particularly interested in are
the ones that live in the the right sort
of distance away from their planet that
can have liquid water and more and more
missions are coming JWST Plato so we
should be finding more and more
earth-like planets in the future so
hopefully fingers crossed because it
sounds like we're gonna need one right
so that just about wraps it up in terms
of the everyone's questions so again
thank you everyone so much for sending
in your questions and I'm really sorry
that I couldn't get them all they were
like literally hundreds always good so
again thank you and we're gonna pick
three schools to actually receive a buck
as a thank you three books are on the
table live live prop from the actual
event we might even sign them I'll get
the paddle to side them for you as well
um so again thank you very much and of
course the prize for don't forget my the
prize or you can keep sending in your
questions right through until tomorrow
morning
and we will pick our favorite and then
send you some vouchers right so as I
said time to vote so you have I think
there are several options here but
remember the big question that we are
answering after hearing all of the
thoughts of our panel and myself and
hopefully you guys watching at home at
school big question is could we live on
another planet
so please do vote have a discussion
about it I'm
ask the panel to give us their final
thoughts
short and sweet if you can could we live
on our planet yes if we could find one
that's very short sweet yes and we could
find one Tessa we need to get offer that
is for certain could we live in a space
colony maybe that's an alternative to
living on another planet if we can't
find one like a space station John Space
Station well I think it's really
important to think about who the we is
in the could we live in another planet
and any kind of possible sister needs to
think about kind of who's in charge as
someone asked quite rightly yo where's
the money coming from what's our aims
are we gonna just take the inequality of
Earth and particular protect it
somewhere else or can we kind of make
something better kind of utopia is the
word we we've kind of threw around a bit
but it's got to Greek etymologies one
means like the best place and another
means no place so it could and could a
perfect society exist I'm not sure but I
think that we really needs to be
interrogated very good point and I'm
gonna I guess I should fully understand
that yeah I'm gonna say yes and I'd
agree with with John I think you know if
we found something I think we could make
it work as cause you mentioned humans
are very adaptable and you know we sort
of redefine what what you being human is
or civilization as I said so I think we
could but we would have to find one
first that's there and get yes I'd get
there right so now pretty much wraps it
up so thank you very much everyone for
watching thank you very much to our
lovely panel it's it's been a pleasure
please do keep voting it's open until
11:00 o'clock tomorrow morning
do keep sending your questions as well
and tune in for the next one the next
live show you that we'll be doing and
check out explore for more great
discussions around this topic around
various other big questions it's a
really great website I can say this
because I actually work for them it's
actually really good you should all
check it out it's amazing
and yeah that's it thank you very much
for joining us thank you
[Music]
you